Adds RFC for disabling SBOM (#161)
paketo-buildpacks/rfcs: text/0043-disable-sbom.md

# Provide Global Mechanism to Disable SBOM Generation

## Summary

Users should have a mechanism to disable the generation of SBOM documents
during the build process.

## Motivation

The generation of the SBOM documents for an image can be very time-intensive in
some cases. We have seen a doubling of build times for Node.js applications.
Additionally, some users are not interested in taking advantage of the SBOM
features of the buildpacks.

## Detailed Explanation

If a user wishes to produce an image that does not contain SBOM documents, they
can set the `BP_GENERATE_SBOM` environment variable to `false`. When unset, the
value of this environment variable is assumed to be `true`.

> When `BP_GENERATE_SBOM` is set to `false`, none of the buildpacks executing

Reviewer: In the Buildpacks Spec v0.7/ Platform Spec v0.8, the `restorer` phase of the lifecycle [restores SBOMs from previous builds](https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/blob/buildpack/v0.7/platform.md#outputs-2). What's the expected behaviour of turning off the SBOM with this env var if there are preexisting SBOM files from earlier builds?

Author: If the layer is reused, then we could say that the behavior is that previously generated SBOM outputs may survive into the new image. That is to say, it is not on buildpacks to clear out SBOMs from previous builds. Ultimately, in most cases, the SBOM should be cleared as soon as the layer needs to be rebuilt for a new package or runtime version. Or, the user could clear their cache before the build to ensure a fresh start.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/rfcs/pull/161/commits/c566e4612de413b399b20e9d4e2882011aab7883

during the build phase should generate or attach an SBOM in their outputs. This
would apply to both new (Syft, CycloneDX, and SPDX formats) and old (label) SBOM

> outputs.

Reviewer 2: How do you feel about specifically adding a label when the user opts out that would indicate the user opted out? I think this could be helpful for a couple of reasons:

a.) it would be easy for tooling to check this and react accordingly. The tooling would know why an SBOM isn't there.
b.) similarly, if someone is troubleshooting and SBOM isn't present, then it's easy to differentiate between it being missing due to a technical problem or the user opting out.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/rfcs/pull/161/commits/259df7f0550f32004d063b538b4ae9cc9e51652d

## Rationale and Alternatives

Alternatively, we could not provide an mechanism to disable SBOM generation.
This does not seem like a great option as the build-time penalty introduced by

> SBOM generation can be substantial.

Reviewer 2: Does anyone feel strongly enough that everyone should always have an SBOM included? SBOM is one of the marquee features of buildpacks. I assume that there are/will be tools built that consume the SBOM and do interesting stuff with it. Not having an SBOM could impact the success/adoption of those tools.

Do we feel like the performance hit here is related to the tool we are using? Is there a chance this tooling will get better/faster with some time/improvements?

Once we enable a feature like this (disabling SBOM), it would be hard to take it back.

I'm not sure exactly how I feel about the above statements, but I wanted to voice some contrary talking points to see what folks think.

Reviewer 2: I also wonder about how this might impact adoption for large companies. If you allow disabling SBOM at the developer level, there isn't really a way to ensure that SBOM is there like if that is a company security/compliance requirement. 

If a dev can go in and turn off SBOM, they could bypass that requirement. Then additional work needs to be done to catch and force users to generate SBOM.

Reviewer 3: I think optionality will ensure that you don't discourage casual developers from adopting buildpacks due to much longer build times due to sbom. At the enterprise level, lots of things can be disabled by a developer choosing to avoid security practices set in place by their leadership or security team.

Reviewer 2: >I think optionality will ensure that you don't discourage casual developers from adopting buildpacks due to much longer build times due to sbom.

Right, but it's going to default to being enabled. It'll be slow out of the box. That means a casual developer needs to know to disable this to speed things up. I'm sure some will, but some won't too.

I definitely don't think we should just expect users to be Ok with it being slower, but perhaps there are other options. Improvements to the scanning tools? Different scanning tools? Performing a "lite" scan vs a full scan (possibly we could adjust the options to change the fidelity of information generated to speed up the scan)? Buildpack dev/test/debug mode, where we build the app image in a way that is only suitable for development but in that case, we don't scan (perhaps this would be a deterrent to using this as a way to bypass SBOM generation)?

I'm just concerned about making this optional. SBOM is an important feature of buildpacks. It would be nice if Paketo as a project can declare that all of our buildpacks generate SBOM. If we make it optional, that statement is diluted.

Reviewer 2: @fg-j I think in my mind SBOM is a security-related component. Do we have prior art to allow users to disable security-related features?

Reviewer: Do you think source code removal falls into that category, @dmikusa-pivotal? In that case, the ability to switch off source code removal feels like a comparable example.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I could see arguments for that being security-related. 

I was thinking about this from the Java perspective. What I found that I think matches up is the ability to force a JDK to be installed in the runtime container. That would be prior art for something "security-related" (that you can opt-out of and it makes the images less secure). That's widely considered bad practice, cause it's including compiler tools in your runtime image. We allow that option though because there are some use cases that require it (they do on-the-fly compilation).

So it seems like there are a couple of things.

Ultimately what I think would negate this argument, but I'm not sure is possible, would be if a setting like this could be controlled at the builder level or across a platform. In that way, users can set it one way for local development but platform operators/companies can dictate a policy that cannot be side-stepped for production environments. I think there is going to be a desire for control over SBOM generation at the Ops level and that it'll be policy requirements for companies. If we can't deliver that, I worry it could impact adoption.

Author: I think that type of platform-wide override would need to be something that lived at the platform level. For instance, could there not be a `kpack` feature that enforced a specific environment variable was always set to a specific value, no matter what a developer might have provided. The interface for either of these features would still be an environment variable, but its up to the platform to enable this platform-wide override functionality.

Reviewer 2: No disagreements there, a platform implementation makes sense. There is no present implementation though, so if we allow this to be disabled it could be a blocker for adoption with some users.

I'd be more OK with this if the RFC did not require language families to implement it. There is sufficient prior art that settings like this can be adoption at the project level and made optional, like the [RFC 32](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0032-reloadable-process-types.md) and [RFC 37](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0037-remote-debug.md). They define the interface, but don't require it to be implemented.

We could also not specify anything at the organizational level and let each
buildpack subteam decide how they would like to handle this for their
ecosystem. However, with regards to this particular feature, it doesn't seem
like there would be a big need to have differing implementations of this flag
for each ecosystem. It would mean in some polyglot build scenarios that users
might need to specify that they'd like to disable SBOM generation in more than
one way. We and users would likely benefit more from a standardized feature
flag that worked uniformly across all buildpacks.

## Implementation

> All buildpacks that generate an SBOM will be required to honor the
> `BP_GENERATE_SBOM` environment variable. When set to `false` these buildpacks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A buildpack that generates an SBOM and wishes to allow users to skip SBOM generation, should honor the `BP_GENERATE_SBOM` environment variable. When set to `false` these buildpacks
```

Thoughts about making this optional? I can see where it's useful for some buildpacks. If SBOM generation adds a perceptible amount of delay, allowing users to skip would be helpful. 

On the Java side, the scan is very fast. I'm not sure we'd want to implement this unless something changes and the scanning starts to impact build times.

Making this option would ensure the UX is consistent across language families if a language family decides to permit this.

Reviewer 4: Personally I think it's more confusing to have some buildpacks in the project (cross-language) that allow it to be disabled and other that do not. If the default is to generate the SBOM, I don't see much downside to allowing users to disable it.

Reviewer 2: I see value in the SBOM being consistently present on all images we generate. It may not matter at dev time, but for production environments, I think adoption in larger companies could be slowed if we allow this to be disabled. Assuming we go ahead with this RFC, making the implementation of it optional would still allow us to still make that guarantee for some language families, where it's feasible.

Author: I've changed the language here to specify that this is opt-in behavior for a buildpack.
